---
layout: single
title:  "Gazebo Dances: Rehearsal Schedule"
date:   2013-10-07
categories: gazebo
image:
  feature: gazebo.png
---

I had the opportunity to rehearse and perform <i>Gazebo Dances for Band</i> with the Cornell University Winds during Fall 2013. Below is my rehearsal schedule and a reflection after each rehearsal. Generally speaking, Gazebo Dances was allotted 45 minutes of rehearsal time in the beginning of the semester, and 30 minutes closer to the concert (due to the addition of another work on the program).

The rehearsal scope is my own addition, and is rated on the following scale:

>Very Macro &mdash; Broad strokes on the entire piece, or several movements.

>Macro &mdash; A single movement through one lens, themes, and form.

>Micro &mdash; A focus on individual motives, balance, blend, shaping, etc.

>Very Micro &mdash; Very specific matters, e.g., note length/attacks/releases, articulation, etc.

These reflections are fairly informal, due to the personal nature of journal entries.

<b>Rehearsal 1 -- 10/1/2013 -- Very Macro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Sight reading, with as few stops as possible. Provide brief background to the work, its origins as a piano solo, and then play it!  
<b>Reflection:</b> Good sight reading! Not too much to report here. We have a lot of work to do, but we mostly made it through the initial run. 

<b>Rehearsal 2 -- 10/3/2013 -- Macro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Read through movements one and three. Discuss their overall moods and figure out what feelings are evoked. "What do we need musically to make these feelings happen for the audience?"   
<b>Reflection:</b> In 40 minutes, we successfully ran through and discussed main ideas behind the work. Descriptors for movement one included joyous, upbeat, and political (?). Movement three was well summarized by one student as "bittersweet." There were many blank stares from the ensemble when I asked for their input. Calling on students was necessary, but it got everyone more engaged. It is hard to tell how many of them enjoy actively learning about the work, versus just the "fix-it" mentality so frequently used in rehearsals. I believe it will help to grow their overall musicianship. 

<b>Rehearsal 3 -- 10/8/2013 -- Macro (some Micro) </b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Read through movement two, focusing on the same initial matters (moods, feelings) as for movements one and three in the first rehearsal. Start rehearsing movement one, pointing out the main themes and how they should be approached musically. If time remains, read through movement four, and explain that due to its straightforward nature, it will be rehearsed considerably less than the other three.   
<b>Reflection:</b> Movement two went quite well. We took it initially under tempo (~132 bpm) to ensure playability, but quickly increased it to closer to performance tempo. Descriptors included "creepy circus" and "lopsided". We briefly discussed what characteristics give it this feel (frequent harmonic shifts and asymmetrical meter). In movement one, we focused on main motives and the best way to approach them musically. We also started speaking about style. The read-through of movement four was surprisingly poor. Issues were mainly caused by a lack of counting and confidence in playing the more exposed sections. This will be rehearsed on Thursday. Notes from Robert Issacs, “Continue `crowd sourcing' your rehearsals; it makes everyone quite engaged. Your Socratic rehearsal technique is effective. Consider mirroring less (although it's helpful in these beginning rehearsals) and being more conscientious about the perceived dynamic size from your pattern. Take a slower tempo on trickier spots, if you believe it will assist in note accuracy.”

<b>Rehearsal 4 -- 10/10/2013 -- Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Start rehearsing movements three, four, and one, pointing out technically challenging spots that ensemble members will need to focus on individually.  
<b>Reflection:</b> Now that we were a week into the piece, I wanted to draw folks' attention to problematic spots. This would give them a chance to get the correct notes under their fingers before we continued the rehearsal process. In the beginning of the third movement, I gave Nick (oboe soloist) some ideas about shaping his solo, and his use of vibrato. Due to the transparency of the ensemble during his solo, I recommended that he allow his tone to start straight, and then have the vibrato blossom. I believe this imagery worked well, and his sound greatly improved in the third movement overall. I also showed the clarinets the extremely high (and difficult to tune) soloistic writing in the third movement. In the fourth movement, I pointed out solos in the trumpet, clarinet, and oboe. We also worked on section balance during the frequent solos in the movement. Unfortunately, I ran out of time to continue to movement one. Although I did not stay particularly loyal to only pointing out spots that require individual attention, I believe the ensemble became more familiar with Gazebo Dances overall.

<b>Rehearsal 5 -- 10/17/2013 -- Macro, some Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Start with movement two at full tempo, but still beat the 3/4 measures in three and the 5/4 measures in five. Work on evoking the different moods of the movement, and draw attention to spots that still need personal practice. Fix all incorrect notes and missed entrances. Rehearse movement four slowly, section by section, under tempo. Demonstrate the significant dynamic contrast and the importance of listening across the ensemble for a consistent pulse. If time remains, run the movement at the end.  
<b>Reflection:</b> This rehearsal was extremely successful. Movement two is falling well under the fingers, except for several technically difficult passages (for example, flute/piccolo/xylophone mm. 46-50). Cindi suggested that I rehearse movement 4 from end to beginning, which worked well. We ran the movement at the end of rehearsal to put all of our work into context.

<b>Rehearsal 6 -- 10/22/2013 -- Very Macro, then Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Since we are now a third of the way through the rehearsal process, run the entire work, having students note sections that need attention. Write them down, and tackle the larger ones today, and others on Thursday.  
<b>Reflection:</b> Running the piece exposed a lot errors, ranging from incorrect notes and entrances to very poor ensemble balance and blend. Overall, it was truly difficult for me not to stop and to allow errors to go by quickly. After running the piece, I asked everyone what they thought. "Which movements went well? Which need the most work?" They were actively listening and critiquing the ensemble, which was great. After that, I polled the ensemble to know which movement they thought was the worst. The consensus was movement three; I agreed. We started at the beginning of the third movement, and fixed many incorrect entrances. Just before ending, I told the ensemble that I would send out the recording shortly so that everyone could listen to the full ensemble sound.

<b>Rehearsal 7 -- 10/24/2013 -- Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Start fixing errors found in the run through in rehearsal six. Tackle the most problematic movements first: begin with the second half of movement three, then jump to the beginning of movement one for style.  
<b>Reflection:</b> It was great to be back in charge, so to speak. Giving up control to the students' ears is very difficult. James Spinazzola and I spoke frequently last semester about the "fix-it" mentality that rehearsal technicians have: spot an error, and fix it. This makes rehearsals usually successful (keeping in mind that retention is a problem), but they are usually bland and unenjoyable for the ensemble. We began with the third movement. I asked the clarinetists why m. 42 was a problem; they told me they did not understand how the fermatas were being conducted. After clarifying this, we ran this section successfully. I could tell the other members of the ensemble were starting to fall asleep, especially the percussion (which is minimal in this movement.) I jumped to the first movement to get more students involved. We retuned the opening 9th interval, and worked on unifying the style and balance of the opening sonority. We also reviewed the necessary dynamic shifts needed, especially in sections like mm. 8-14, where the works goes from ff to mf, mp, f, p, and finally back to f.

<b>Rehearsal 8 -- 10/31/2013 -- Macro and Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Today's goal is to finish providing feedback on the movements we worked on in rehearsal 7: the second halves of movements one and three.  
<b>Reflection:</b> I began in the middle of the first movement. I frequently do not do this, since I believe that providing context is essential. However, since I wanted to focus on the second half, I began at m. 108. The first goal was to unify the tempo shift beginning at m. 124. Although we discussed this rallentando before, it was clear that ensemble members were not expecting it. I asked them to both circle it and check in with me to find our new tempo. We also worked on more important lines in this section: muted trombones at mm. 127-128 and all of the section solis throughout. Since I was short on time, I jumped to movement three afterward. We began at m. 10, worked on balance in the solo clarinets, unity in brass beginning in m. 13, and intonation in the woodwinds beginning in m. 15. I asked the flutes and piccolo to play senza vibrato in order to better blend with the clarinets. Just before ending the rehearsal, I began to address the brass style (first marked and separated, and then warm and lush) in m. 30 and onward. 

<b>Rehearsal 9 -- 11/1/2013 -- Macro, Micro, and Very Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Start by running movement four, focusing on overall balance and blend. Afterwards, start back from the beginning and fix these issues. Stop when necessary to fix these problems and other style concerns.  
<b>Reflection:</b> After running the work, I solicited feedback from the ensemble. Students agreed that they were very much into their own parts, and did not focus well on others. Beginning in m. 152, the brass began to rush considerably. This was noticed by many of the woodwinds. I also addressed the quick mute change necessary in the trumpets at m. 145; it was missed each time that we ran this movement. After pointing out these mistakes, we began back at the beginning. I let the ensemble play for few dozen bars to hear how significant the ensemble sound changes when folks are actively listening. After that, we began to work on micro details, especially unifying style.

<b>Rehearsal 10 -- 11/5/2013 -- Very Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Polish movement one.  
<b>Reflection:</b> Before I began, I warned the ensemble that I would stop frequently, and that our goal was to polish the first movement. I also told them that although I usually enjoy facilitating rehearsals with a lot of ensemble interaction, we did not have a lot of time to spend doing this for the rest of the rehearsal process. (That being said, they were very understanding. Some of the students that do not like giving feedback were happy to hear this!) I stopped to unify several entrances, and we spent a considerable portion on the “slightly slower” section of the movement, mm. 124-147. As I only had a few minutes left after fixing balance in this section, we played to the end of the movement and stopped.

<b>Rehearsal 11 -- 11/7/2013 -- Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Work on improving the style of the second movement. Currently it is quite heavy, as opposed to a light waltz.  
<b>Reflection:</b> After I gave this opening idea, I started to conduct the work in a faster three. I thought about conducting this movement in one, but I knew that it would be considerably more difficult for the ensemble and for myself. Just as I was thinking this, Cindi said, “Why don't you conduct it in one?” “Oh no!” I thought to myself. I knew I was going to have serious problems with this. Even so, I gave it a try. I was quite uncomfortable. I was focusing on my conducting and not on the ensemble. This made it quite difficult to rehearse as well. The style was slightly improved, but overall, it was not worth the problems it was causing. I decided to work on my conducting before the next rehearsal, and jump to movement four to fix a few problematic areas there. During my final 10 minutes, I isolated the melody in the basses (mm. 110-114), the unison woodwind and muted trumpet soli (mm. 119-123) and the trombone glisses (mm. 132-133).

<b>Rehearsal 12 -- 11/12/2013 -- Macro, Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> After spending a few days working on my one pattern (for movement two), I want to put in context. Work the movement back to front since the ending is the most shaky.  
<b>Reflection:</b> Conducting this movement in one was adequate, but not ideal. Each time there was an entrance issue, I was unsure if it was my error or the players'. This is not a good spot for a conductor to be in; I do not want to tell people they are making mistakes if it is my fault. I have decided from this point onward to conduct the work in three for the sake of clarity. I believe that at this point, accurate entrances take precedence over style. Conducting the movement in three also ensures that I have complete confidence when rehearsing the ensemble. This is essential from this point forward, as we are working to finesse details. Working the movement back to front was a good idea. By the end of the rehearsal, the ending was sounding considerably more confident.

<b>Rehearsal 13 -- 11/14/2013 -- Micro, Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Run movement three, and then return to fix errors.  
<b>Reflection:</b> It was difficult to run this movement without stops, but I wanted to be sure that everyone were playing right from the start. This is the most thinly scored movement, and I have noticed before how quickly the ensemble zones out when rehearsing it slowly. After we stopped, we returned to the opening of the movement. I complimented Nick on his solo; the vibrato was quite well done. I asked him for a greater sense of shaping, especially with the marked hairpins in m. 7. We previously added hairpins to the ostinato in the opening clarinets. I reminded everyone about those, and the role of the constant eighths (to keep the tempo consistent). In the next section, we worked on the balance between the first and second clarinets in mm. 10-12 and the piú mosso section at m. 12. At the next rehearsal, I want to continue with the third movement and work on the overall quality of the ensemble sound in the climax of this movement.

<b>Rehearsal 14 -- 11/19/2013 -- Very Micro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> Since this is our second to last rehearsal, and the final rehearsal before we are in the concert hall, focus on the spots that need the most attention in movements two, three, and four.  
<b>Reflection:</b> I started with the end of movement two, working back to front (quickly!) We realigned a few entrances that were problematic. These were fixed previously, but were not retained. After that, I resumed where I had left off in movement two from the last rehearsal: m. 17. The brass was not playing with their best tone, so I asked them to think of a personal memory that would reflect a warm chorale. My example was a large church choir. I reminded them that connections between music and life are essential; this is why we make music! I also drew their attention to the almost sorrowful nature of the accented notes in m. 20 and the need to exaggerate length and tone quality. We also worked on the overarching crescendo into the climax at m. 30. After briefly refining the conclusion of the movement, I worked back to front on movement four, ensuring that all of the various section solis were strong and accurate.

<b>Rehearsal 15 -- 11/21/2013 -- Very Macro</b>  
<b>Plan:</b> As this is the final rehearsal, I want to run the work and address balance and blend in Bailey Hall, where it will be performed.  
<b>Reflection:</b> Although I wanted to stop and address quite a few passages, I knew that I had only a brief amount of time. As such, I only made essential comments. I reminded everyone that crispness was quite important; the sound in Bailey is considerably more live and resonant than in our rehearsal room (Lincoln B20). In the second movement, section solis were too quiet. I had everyone play more soloistically when they had the melody. In the final movement, everyone still wanted to rush the end considerably. I asked them to write “don't rush” at the final statement of the melody (m. 152). After this, I thanked everyone for a wonderful rehearsal process and told them how much I look forward to the concert. 